[Music]
okay I've been waiting for this for a
while as someone who's been on the
sidelines of the windows game for a
little while now and seeing all this
hype and this new matte black laptop
that's supposed to be generational it's
got me
thinking is it legit like have Windows
laptops actually caught up to the Apple
silicon leap from a couple years ago
because this is a new Microsoft Surface
laptop and it doesn't have an Intel chip
inside it doesn't have an AMD chip
inside this laptop has a qual Snapdragon
X Elite chip inside meaning it is an arm
laptop now years ago Apple went through
this transition from Intel chips to arm
chips and it was crazy successful like
no one could really match their
efficiency and seamless integration the
vertical integration the overall package
of their laptops just took a Quantum
Leap Forward now Windows laptops around
the same time actually if you remember
kind of tried the same thing I don't
know if you remember the Surface Pro X
that didn't go so well and so we've
continued to have in an AMD laptop since
then but it seems like this one has gone
way better so I've been using this
laptop for the past couple weeks you
might have see me with it on the
waveform podcast and I've got a pretty
good idea now of what's gone well and
what is still a trade-off so the big
Advantage the mega Quantum Leap Forward
was inefficiency which in a laptop with
the same size battery means a
dramatically improved battery life and
this laptop absolutely got a big bump up
so I remember reading reviews of the
last surface laptop with an Intel chip
which already had a pretty solid battery
life and the Microsoft quote was 19
hours this one's quote is 23 hours but
what that's translated to for me
basically is all day battery life for
mixed use with no worries like that's
high brightness web browsing email
watching videos research type activities
and then ending the day at like 40%
easily so I I just really don't think
about charging much which is awesome for
a 14-in laptop on paper it's getting
compared a lot to the m 3 13-in MacBook
Air and it even outlasts it on some
synthetic benchmarks which is awesome so
that's one success definitely check the
box great battery life love that and
then the other second success that we
were looking forward to was just a well
optimized performance and it's not like
the super high-end gaming performance
I'm not talking about that type of
performance but I just mean like a
general smoothness and consistency and
Rock Solid performance across all your
everyday regular tasks that sort of
performance now I'm going to get into
app support in a minute but I I
basically found this to be a very
capable laptop now again I've been on
the sidelines from Windows for a bit so
I don't have as many reference points
but this is a $2,000 14-in laptop that
can basically do anything I ask of it
without breaking a sweat photo editing
in Infinity not a problem literally
anything in the Microsoft Office Suite
no problem whether you're plugged in or
not you know I found the trackpad
gestures are pretty smooth the graphics
of the whole UI in general are
consistent from full battery to nearly
dead so using the software that runs
natively on it is Snappy and a great
experience but that very quickly gets
you into the conversation about the
downside of switching to arm this is
what I was curious about repeating from
last time and this actually happened in
the Mac world too when they made this
transition the number one difficulty to
changing the entire architecture of your
computer is actually app compatibility
so I remember when the Mac went through
this there were basically three types of
apps there's obviously optimized apps at
the top of the list like that's the
ideal obviously all the first party apps
are optimized off the bat and apple did
a lot of work trying to get as many
developers on board as possible to get
their apps optimized on arm but then
there were apps that were built for x86
but would still work on arm through
emulation so they not perform
necessarily as well as they could but at
least they worked anyway and then there
were apps that just didn't work at all
so right now for Windows on arm you have
these three types of apps again and my
assessment is that at this very moment
there's pretty good support for Native
apps as far as things people use every
day but it's definitely still not
perfect so okay Photoshop and Lightroom
CC run native Chrome Spotify Prime video
Dropbox Zoom like there's a lot of
popular apps across the board that just
run natively and they're super smooth
and they're great they don't hit battery
hard at all love that so then there are
some apps that I use that don't support
Windows on arm but do get emulated so
they still work technically so Lightroom
classic is a big one my to-do list app
of choice is Tick Tick you might have
heard of it I've referenced it a few
times and it's a great example if you go
to their website they only have x86
versions of the app and I downloaded and
ran the 64-bit version and it works but
it doesn't actually run very well I
actually notice some real chop and some
lag with certain parts of the UI and
it's not even that heavy of an app it's
just a to-do list app and there's a long
list of apps in this sort of limbo phase
where you don't necessarily know if
there's going to be an arm native app
around the corner or not CU adoption is
not super high it's not really a huge
incentive for them to make one yet but
you can still use it it's just not going
to be the ideal experience it might
churn through battery a little bit
quickly but it still works but then
there are just apps that straight up
don't work at all yet um Arc browser uh
Google Drive on desktop I Rely heavily
on that that does not have any
compatibility at all with Windows on arm
uh VMware doesn't work a lot of vpns
don't work and a lot of games straight
up don't run like some of them are
uncompatible but also a lot of them
which might have ordinarily run have
anti-che software that doesn't run on
Windows on arm so the game just doesn't
work at all and there's even some apps
that actually now that I think about it
are compatible but their websites for
the companies that make them don't
actually highlight or prominently show
the download for the arm version so that
it's kind of confusing and it's hard to
find so it's just kind of all over the
place right now so my take here is look
if you are at all considering a Windows
arm laptop specifically look up the apps
that you have to use and make sure
they're at least compatible at least
emulat cuz there might be some promises
of arm versions coming soon or just
statements from a developer I've seen
lot of those but just check the programs
that you know you're going to need to
work because depending on who you are
you could be totally covered and fine or
totally out of luck so there are a
couple Windows arm laptops out there
this is the one I obviously chose to
mess with the the premium matte black
one with the Snapdragon X Elite um so
here's a couple more of my observations
scattered from my couple of weeks of
using it I got to say the build quality
is pretty awesome as they have been with
surface for a little while now I love
the all metal design The keyboard's Rock
Solid big trackpad with excellent
haptics just really good fundamentals
all around the port selection is all
right it's still got that full-size usba
and then there's two USBC with the
headphone jack my only real downside I
would say with it getting as pricey as
it can get is that there is no OLED
option so instead it's a 2304 X 1536 120
HZ LCD touchcreen with that 3x2 aspect
ratio and I love that it's tall it's
just it can't quite match the Deep
blacks and contrast of an OLED obviously
even though it's a pretty good LCD so I
just feel like I basically traded the
OLED for a high refresh rate here but I
would have liked to have seen an OLED
option and then just know that it's not
like it's not like a super high-end
gaming PC it's very strong in
performance across the board it'll do
all the other things but similar to
Apple's M Series Laptops like it's a
built-in GPU it's not going to be as
powerful as a dedicated GPU so don't
expect I mean you can still play some
games sure but you're not getting this
laptop to max out frame rates and Elden
ring or something if you study the
benchmarks enough you'll find that these
chips have a lot of cores but weaker
individual performance on like a single
core basis so it's good at throwing a
lot of cores at tasks and getting things
done and that's nice just note that and
it's it's generally pretty good at
staying cool and not spinning up the
fans which I also think is great and
then of course this is also one of the
very first co-pilot PCS so it's got the
dedicated co-pilot button on the
keyboard and so yeah this chip has an
npu which does specific AI related
processing things like the studio camera
effects that are built into the camera
or the forced artificial eye contact in
the camera and it'll do it without
pulling anything from the CPU or GPU and
of course you can always hit that
co-pilot button to talk to Microsoft
co-pilot ask it anything the same way
you'd talk to Bing or chat or Gemini but
overall this laptop is a good start I
think I mean I've been waiting
personally for a premium built matte
black Windows laptop for a while on arm
and this is that it's actually what
we've been waiting for um I think the
question really is does the software you
use work on arm like that's the main
question you should be considering when
thinking about if you're going to buy
one of these things now before you go
here's a question have you ever looked
at a laptop or smartphone and wondered
what's going on inside it because
Channel sponsor dbrand has your answers
now you've seen for years now one of my
favorite party tricks has been this
sheet of magnet paper you just lay it
down on any device to see where a few of
the internals are like the mag safe
magnet array or the speaker D Brand's
x-ray line takes that magnet paper
experience to a whole another level
letting you see basically every single
component inside your device and yes
this is an actual legit x-ray of that
device yes dbrand took hundreds of
devices to a Metrology lab and literally
shot each one of them with a special
x-ray machine for maximum accuracy and
they also made a light mode version of
every x-ray so personally I am into the
dark mode version but hey if you don't
want to have to choose if you buy any
x-ray skin you'll get the other colorway
for free with your order so if that
sounds like a good deal to you I'll
leave a link for you to check them out
below it's dbrand.com
xray but yeah that's been it let me know
what you think of the surface laptop of
the whole windows on arm thing I'll
check out the comments but either way
let me know catch you guys on the next
one peace